# Critical_Scale_Invariance_in_Healthy_Human_Heart_Rate
The aim of this project is to confirm what is found in the paper DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.178103.
We demonstrate the robust scale-invariance in the probability density function (PDF) of detrended healthy human heart rate increments, which is preserved not only in a quiescent condition, but also in a dynamic state where the mean level of the heart rate is dramatically changing. Moreover, we will show that such increments are not Gaussian distributed, but they display fat tails. These results strongly support the view that a healthy human heart rate is controlled to converge continually to a critical state. In addition, we also demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively the multifractal properties of the increments by means of their fluctuations on different timescales and the Hurst coefficient. Eventually, we show the results for long-term ECG recordings from 15 subjects with severe congestive heart failure, in order to show the different results with respect to the healthy subjects' ECGs.
The two datasets considered in the study have different features: one consists of ECG signals from 50 healthy subjects without any known disease affecting the autonomic control of heart rate; the other one consists of data of seven 26-h-long periods, collected when the subjects underwent ‘‘constant routine’’ (CR) protocol, where known behavioral factors affecting heart rate (e.g., exercise, diet, postural changes, and sleep) are eliminated.
The first challenge of this project has been to find datasets that showed similar features to the ones considered in the reference paper and we eventually found both in the PhysioNet website, the Research Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals. The first one is called "MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm Database", that includes 18 long-term ECG recordings of subjects who were found to have had no significant arrhythmias. The second one is called Fantasia Database, as it includes signals from forty rigorously-screened healthy subjects underwent 120 minutes of continuous supine resting while watching the movie Fantasia. Finally, as far as the data from the subjects with severe congestive heart failure, we use another database from the PhysioNet website, the BIDMC Congestive Heart Failure Database. More details are contained in the theoretical PDF.
